The Joe Rogan experience. And that we just,
we live our lives in the most ordinary meascale phenomena where, you know,
we don't see, um,
we don't see the quantum because we're not, you know,
playing with polarized lenses in ways that show us what light actually is. Um,
you know, we're not playing with super fluid helium. We're not, uh,
understanding, um,
just how bizarre faction is, or, you know,
whether there's some sort of quantum aspect of biology and what you see people
doing is that they're, they, they start grasping for everything. Like,
I'm not saying that there's nothing ancient aliens or UFOs or whatever,
but a lot of that is just,
people want something richer and more, more amazing for their lives.
And I'm not gonna pass too much judgment on that.
But I am gonna say if we just restricted the,
the rest of our days to the provable stuff that we is out there,
it could be amazing. People need more meaning with all of the rationality,
with all of the mystery we've taken out of the world.
It's time to put a ton of it back in.
When you say, put, put a ton of it back in. Yeah. Like how,
how you gonna put it back in.
Well, um, you know, if I were to start talking about the,
octonians an eightdimensional number system that no one understands
I can do that totally rigorously.
I can show you all sorts of bizarre stuff involving the octonians.
What is the octonians? Well, that's my point.
You don't even know that there are four types of numbers whose
dance, uh,
it's called the real numbers that we know complex numbers that you were tortured
once with in high school, maybe during some kind of a trip,
a friend of you mentioned the qu mentioned the quians to you,
and then there's this one system of numbers, uh,
which is like the crazy relative, nobody discusses.
And that's called the octonians and the octonians are so weird that math and
IANS don't even really understand why they're there.
That's an octoian.
That thing. Well,
my guess is that that's probably back to the Ru root laice of E eight. Yeah.
Which we discussed last time, which has this kind of Mandela pattern to it. But,
um, I could show you, there are multiplication table.
I could describe their ceies there's symmetry group called G two,
which involves these strange numbers, but it's a mystery. Like if I got to, I,
I, I probably know more about the tonians than most mathematicians.
If I got to the end of all of my knowledge of the octonians,
I still wouldn't know what to tell you about why they're there and what they
mean. Nobody knows. I, I promise you that. Yeah.
That's a real mystery. Now we could talk about like, you know,
my friend said that that event that happened in Siberia in the early, you know,
20th century was actually an alien visitation. Well maybe yes. Maybe no,
I don't know anything about it. If I just focused us on, like,
what we know is out there that we don't grasp,
which is a hundred percent rock solid,
it provides so much mystery and meaning and invitation to adventure.
Like if you, if you're looking for a hero's journey,
I I'll show you a ton of these things and it's empowering.
It's just you incredibly, um,
it's incredibly empowering to know that you're a hair's breath away from
superpowers. So I wanna help people explore that.
So what is that like when you're explaining this,
when you're saying this is bizarre series of numbers, right? What is it doing?
Like what, how do, how do we interface.
With it? Well, um, so for example, let's,
let's take an easier system that we feel a little bit more confident with.
There's this thing called the quadians, which are based on the number one,
the complex number. I,
if you remember that from some distant math class,
and then there's some thing called J and K.
So I times J equals K J times K equals.
I J times I is equal to the negative of I times J
so negative K there's a multiplication table for these,
these objects and these objects help with, um,
computer vision, you know, uh, simulation, 3d, uh,
projections they're used all the time in, um, probably video games.
They may come up in nature. I mean, we know that nature uses complex numbers,
and most people never found out why they were being told about complex numbers
or imaginary numbers,
because they never got to the point where you're actually looking at wave
functions, uh, that describe photons and electrons and all of,
all of that good stuff that you read about in physics. So in essence,
um, the,
the octonians are a system where IJK keeps going effectively through elemental P
QR, you know,
till you've got eight different objects and they're not even associative,
which is one of these rule that you learn about like, you know,
multiplication is associative and you think, well, what isn't associative,
right? So if I, you know, if you, if you talk about commutivity, for example,
I can't tell whether you put on your shirt, uh, first or your shoes first,
because it's, it's commutative as to which order you did it.
But if you put on your underwear in a different order,
then you put on your pants,
it'll become immediately obvious which order you did it and right. <laugh> okay.
Well,
there's another thing called a associaivity and almost everything that we deal
with in, you know, elementary mathematics is associatetives here. Like,
why do I learn about associateivity I've never met anything that is an
associate. Well, the Octonian vein associate,
they're a number system that is responsible for most
of the Platy pie of mathematics, if you, well,
things that just occur anomalously so that's an
example of an invitation out of this planet. You know,
if you start to think about the octonians and care about them and say,
are they a message? Do they have meaning we can prove that they're there.
I can construct them for you,
but they generate so much bizarreness in some sort of abstract space.
How are they recognized? Like how, how was it,
how did it come to be that this was a point.
Of discussion? Well, there's a, there's a process. In fact,
there are two processes where you can build these number systems up from each
other. So you,
the complex from the real you build thequaterians from the complex,
you build the octonians from the cuterians and then you can't build anything
beyond that, because each time you're giving up a,
a magical power to get to the next stage.
And by the time you get to the octonians, you're exhausted the system.
When you say giving up a magical power. Well, like for example, um,
it's very hard to think about the square root of negative one. So like,
what does it mean for something squared to be negative one? Right?
So that's like the complex numbers gave up that kind of sensibility.
And then the complex numbers are at least commutative,
eight times B equals B times a,
but the quadterians don't have that pro property.
So then you have a further property called associaivity.
So you're sort of to eat, to build the next system.
You're giving up properties that sort of make sense to us.
And by the time you've got into the octonians, you've given everything away.
There's no way you're gonna build the next system, but yet it's real. Yes.
Yet it's real in a, in a, in a, in a very real mathematical sense. So does.
It just highlight our lack of understanding?
Yeah. And it, and it is a call to adventure.
It's like a message from something that isn't human.
I'm not gonna say that it's God, I'm not gonna say that it's logic or designed,
but it's a more.
Complex, it's.
Something system of the universe. That's right.
And you have to uncover that these things are there. Or for example, you know,
sea elegance. I don't know if you've like played with, uh,
do you know about sea elegigans? No. All right. Sea,
elegigan say elegance C a letter Uh-huh elegance.
And ELGAN like, ELGAN I think it's okay.
So it's this worm that was chosen by this guy, Sidney brennaner, who just died.
And it's a shame because he would've been a great podcast guest,
just like one of the most brilliant biologists that we didn't focus on.
And he said, you know what?
We're missing a species that we can completely describe
soup to nuts.
Here's the one that's about the simplest thing with a brain it's only got a
thousand cells and 300 of those cells make up a very primitive neural system.
And we're gonna track where every cell, like, bring up Jamie, if you,
I could ask you so to bring up the cell lineage diagram for sea
elegance.
So this will be the first of two images. Whoa, Jesus.
That is a complete map of how one fertilized egg
becomes
a tiny microscopic worm for every possible division. What in.
The am I looking at? <laugh>.
I love when you say that, that is so wild. Yeah.
Right now here's the thing.
Everyone in biology knows how cool this thing is.
And very few people,
not enough people outside of biology know that we have completely mapped
how one cell, like if you're 30 trillion cells around,
it's too big to write a diagram it's only possible because there are only a
thousand cells and this thing has locomotion. It has sexual reproduction,
you know, it eats.
So you're looking at the architectural plans for an actual
organism. And Jamie, when we're done with that,
if I could trouble you for the.
For the folks that are just falling,
gonna pause for you for a moment for the sort are following at home, listening,
just listening, not watching, but we're looking at, um, Jamie,
explain how someone could see this image. If they want go with themselves.
Um, the letter C it's not the, not C like the ocean C elegance.
And then that cell lineage, it looks like a, a really long basketball bracket.
Yes. Kind of pushed out forever.
Now that's a good way to describe it. <laugh> yeah. So it's wild.
Yeah. Wow.
Talk about March madness. Yeah.
<Laugh> a madness. June madness. Yeah. <laugh>.
February. It just doesn't stop. If we could bring up the, um,
wiring diagram or djacency matrix. Yeah.
The C iswearing right. Yeah. Perfect. Whoa.
That is a complete map of the 300 neurons
in the sea elgan's worm. How they're wired to each other.
Like that is a map of the mind of the worm.
Wow.
Okay. So that's the portal. That's another portal. Here's an organism,
which is completely mapped and has complex behaviors. It has,
I think about half the number of adult cell types that you and I have.
So maybe we have like 250, like only 250 different kinds of adult cells,
more or less. I don't wanna get too precise about that.
And yet we are like 10 trillion or 30 trillion copies of those
tiny number of different types of cells. Well,
I think the sealegigans has about 125 or something like that,
different cell types.
And it only has a thousand cells and it's able to do most of what we're able to
do. We move around, we eat, we have sex.
Great. Pretty simple life.
Do you think it's ever possible? Well, it's, I'm sure it's probably possible.
But do you think in our lifetime we'll ever see a map like that,
of a human organism?
I don't think so.
But the cool thing is we have this map and we still don't understand it.
Like we've got this thing dead to rights. Mm we've got it. Boxed in it.
Can't we know every single cell, what it does. We have all,
all the wirings between the neurons and we still don't get it.
Right. Right. So like, imagine that you're what eight years,
how old is that? Well, what did, what a genius? This sky,
Sidney Brener was for choosing this organism. Mm-hmm right.
Because this organism is the simplest place to look at
complex life. Mm.
This image, the reconstructed biological neural. Network's like what?
I think you're looking okay.
<affirmative> now we could have a discussion about some weird Peruvian structure
and whether we've been visited mm-hmm <affirmative> and I'm be up for that.
Look <laugh>, I'm not, not gonna pretend that I'm too good for it,
but I know that this is real, right. I, I don't have any doubt.
I'm not gonna sit around asking. Well, do you believe that, you know,
aliens talk to this federal government in the forties, right? Um,
that might as well be an alien. Yeah. And it's an invitation to adventure.